HISTORY
IN BRIEFUSA
George Washington addressing the 
Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia, 1787.
INTRODUCTION
The history of the United 
States has been an experiment in democracy 
for more than 200 years. Issues that were addressed in the early years continue to be addressed and resolved today: big government versus small government, individual rights versus group rights, unfettered capitalism versus regulated commerce and labor, engagement with the world versus isolationism. The expectations for American democracy have always been high, and the reality has sometimes been disappointing. Yet the nation has grown and prospered, through a continual process of adaptation and compromise.
1
Early America
At the height of the most recent Ice Age, about 35,000 
years ago, much of the world’s water was locked up in vast continental ice sheets. A land bridge as much 
as 1,500 kilometers wide connected Asia and North America. By 12,000 years ago, humans were living throughout much of the Western Hemisphere.
The fi  rst Americans crossed the land bridge from Asia  
and were believed to have stayed in what is now Alaska for 
2

thousands of years. They then moved south into the land that 
was to become the United States. They settled along the Pacifi  c 
Ocean in the Northwest, in the mountains and deserts of the Southwest, and along the Mississip pi River in the Middle West.
These early groups are known as Hohokam, Adenans, 
Hopewellians, and Anasazi. They built villages and grew crops. Some built mounds of earth in the shapes of pyramids, birds, or serpents. Their life was closely ti ed to the land, and their society 
was clan-oriented and communal. Elements of the natural world played an essential part in  their spiritual beliefs. Their 
Left, Mesa Verde settlement in Colorado, 13th century.  Above, aerial view of the Great 
Serpent Mound in Adams County, Ohio. Carbon tests of the effi   gy revealed that the 
creators of this 1,330-foot monument were members of the Native-American Fort Ancient Culture (A.D. 1000-1550).
3
4culture was primarily oral, althou gh some developed a type of 
hieroglyphics to preserve certain texts. Evidence shows that there was a good deal of trade among the groups but also that some of their relations were hostile.
For reasons not yet completely understood, these early 
groups disappeared over time and were replaced by other groups of Native Americans, including Hopi and Zuni, who fl  ourished. By 
the time Europeans reached what is now the United States, about two million native people, maybe more, lived here. 
The fi  rst Europeans to arrive in North America — at least 
the fi  rst for whom there is soli d evidence — were Norse. 
They traveled west from Greenland, where Erik the Red had founded a settlement around the ye ar 985. In 1001, his son Leif 
is thought to have explored the northeast coast of what is now Canada. Ruins of Norse houses dating from that time have been discovered at L’Anse-aux-Meadows in northern Newfoundland. 
It would be almost 500 more years before other Europeans 
reached North America and another 100 years after that before permanent settlements were established. The fi  rst explorers 
were searching for a sea pass age to Asia. Others — chiefl  y 
British, Dutch, French, and Spanish — came later to claim the lands and riches of what they  called the “New World.”  
The fi  rst and most famous of these explorers was Christopher 
Columbus of Genoa. His trips were fi  nanced by Queen Isabella of 
Spain. Columbus landed on islands in the Caribbean Sea in 1492, 

but he never saw the mainland of the future United States. John 
Cabot of Venice came fi  ve years later on a mission for the king of 
England. His journey was quickly forgotten, but it provided the 
basis for British claims to North America. 
The 1500s were the age of Spanish exploration in the 
Americas. Juan Ponce de León landed in what is now Florida in 1513. Hernando De Soto reached Florida in 1539 and continued as far as the Mississippi River. In 1540, Francisco Vázquez de Coronado set out north from Mexico, which Spain had 
Two monuments to the 
central role Spain played in the exploration of what is now the United States.  Left, the Castillo de San Marcos, built 1672-1695 to guard St. Augustine, Florida, the fi  rst permanent 
European settlement in the continental United States.  Left bottom, fountain and mission remains of the San Juan Capistrano Mission, California, one of nine missions founded by Spanish Franciscan missionaries led by Fray Junípero Serra in the 1770s.  Serra led the Spanish colonization of what is today the state of California. 
5
6conquered in 1522, in search of the mythical Seven Cities of 
Cibola. He never found them, but his travels took him as far as the Grand Canyon in Arizona, as well as into the Great Plains. 
While the Spanish were pushin g up from the south, the 
northern portion of the present-day United States was slowly being revealed through the jour neys of other Europeans. These 
included Giovanni da Verrazano, Jacques Cartier, and Amerigo 
Vespucci, for whom the continent — America — would be named.
The fi  rst permanent European settlement in what was to 
become the United States was established by the Spanish in the middle 1500s at St. Augustine in Florida. However, it would not play a part in the formation of the new nation. That story took place in settlements farthe r north along the Atlantic coast 
— in Virginia, Massachusetts, New York, and the 10 other areas colonized by a growing tide of immigrants from Europe.
Colonial Period
Most settlers who came to the British colonies in the 1600s were English. Others came from The 
Netherlands, Sweden, Germany, France, and later from  
Scotland and Northern Ireland. Some left their homelands to escape war, political oppression, religious persecution, or a prison sentence. 
Some left as servants who expected to work their way to freedom. 
Black Africans were sold into slavery and arrived in shackles.
7By 1690, the population was 250,000. Less than 100 years 
later, it had climbed to 2.5 million.
The settlers had many diff  erent reasons for coming to 
America, and eventually 13 dist inct colonies developed here. 
Diff erences among the three regional groupings of colonies 
were even more marked.
The fi  rst settlements were built along the Atlantic coast 
and on the rivers that fl  owed to the ocean. In the Northeast, 
settlers found hills covered with trees and soil fi  lled with stones 
left behind when the Ice Age glaciers melted. Water power was easy to harness, so “New England” — including Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rhode Island — developed an economy based on wood products, fi  shing, shipbuilding, and trade. 
The middle colonies — including New York and Pennsylvania — had a milder climate and more varied terrain. Both industry 
and agriculture developed there, and society was more varied and cosmopolitan. In New York, for example, one could fi  nd 
Bohemians, Danes, Dutch, English, French, Germans, Irish, Italians, Norwegians, Poles, Portuguese, Scots, and Swedes. The Southern colonies — Virginia, Georgia, and the Carolinas — had a long growing season an d fertile soil, and the economy 
was primarily agricultural. Ther e were both small farmers and 
wealthy aristocratic landowners who owned large plantations worked by African slaves.
Detail from a painting by American artist 
Benjamin West (1738-1820), which depicts William Penn’s treaty with the Native Americans living where he founded the colony of Pennsylvania as a haven for Quakers and others seeking religious freedom.  Penn’s fair treatment of the Delaware Indians led to long-term, friendly relations, unlike the confl  icts between European 
settlers and Indian tribes in other colonies. 
8Thomas Jeff  erson, author of the 
Declaration of Independence and third president of the United States. 
Pilgrims signing the Mayfl  ower Compact 
aboard ship, 1620. 
9
U.S. postage stamp commemorating the bicentennial of the Lewis and Clark expedition under President Thomas Jeff erson. Their expedition 
mapped western land all the way to Oregon for the young United States.
Benjamin Franklin: scientist, inventor, writer, newspaper publisher, city father of Philadelphia, diplomat, and signer of both the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution.
10Relations between settlers and Native Americans, who were 
called Indians, were an unea sy mix of cooperation and confl  ict. 
Certain areas saw trade and some social interaction, but in general, as the new settlement s expanded, the Indians were 
forced to move, often after being defeated in battle. 
Settlement of the colonies  was directly sponsored not 
by 
the British government, but by private groups. All except Georgia 
emerged as companies of shareholders or as proprietorships chartered by the king. Some were  governed rigidly by company 
leaders, but in time, all develo ped a system of participatory 
government based on 
British legal precedent and tradition.
Years of political turmoil in Britain culminated with the 
Glorious Revolution of 1688-89 that deposed King James II and led to limits on the monarchy and greater freedoms for the people. The American colonies benefi  ted from these 
changes. Colonial assemblies cl aimed the right to act as local 
parliaments. They passed measures that limited the power of royal governors and expanded their own power. 
Over the decades that followed, recurring disputes between 
the governors and assemblies awakened colonists to the increasing divergence between American and British interests. The principles and precedents that emerged from these disputes became the unwritten constitution of the colonies.
At fi rst, the focus was on self-government within a British 
commonwealth. Only later came the call for independence.
11Road to Independence
The principles of liberalism and democracy — the political 
foundation of the United States — sprang naturally from 
the process of building a new society on virgin land. 
Just as naturally, the new nation would see itself as diff  erent and 
exceptional. Europe would view it with apprehension, or hope.
Britain’s 13 North American colonies matured during the 
1700s. They grew in population, economic strength, and cultural attainment. They were experienced in self-government. Yet it was not until 170 years after the founding of the fi  rst permanent 
settlement at Jamestown, Virginia, that the new United States of America emerged as a nation.
War between Britain and France in the 1750s was fought 
partly in North America. Britain was victorious and soon initiated policies designed to control and fund its vast empire. These measures imposed greater restraints on the American colonists’ way of life.
The Royal Proclamation of 1763 restricted the opening of 
new lands for settlement. The Sugar Act of 1764 placed taxes on 
luxury goods, including coff  ee, silk, and wine, and made it illegal 
to import rum. The Currency Act of 1764 prohibited the printing of paper money in the colonies. The Quartering Act of 1765 forced colonists to provide food  and housing for royal troops. 
And the Stamp Act of 1765 required the purchase of royal 
12stamps for all legal documents, newspapers, licenses, and leases.
Colonists objected to all these measures, but the Stamp Act 
sparked the greatest organized resistance. The main issue, in the eyes of a growing number of colonists, was that they were being taxed by a distant legislature in which they could not participate. In October 1765, 27 delegates from nine colonies met in New York to coordinate eff  orts to get the Stamp Act 
repealed. They passed resoluti ons asserting the individual 
colonies’ right to impose their own taxes.
Self-government produced local political leaders, and 
these were the men who worked to gether to defeat what they 
considered to be oppressive acts of Parliament. After they succeeded, their coordinated campaign against Britain ended. During the next several years, however, a small number of radicals tried to keep the controversy alive. Their goal was not accommodation, but independence.
Samuel Adams of Massachusetts was the most eff  ective. 
He wrote newspaper articles and made speeches appealing to the colonists’ democratic instincts. He helped organize committees throughout the colonies that became the basis of a revolutionary movement. By 1773, the movement had attracted colonial traders who were angry with British attempts to regulate the tea trade. In December, a group of men sneaked on to three British ships in Boston harbor and dumped their cargo of tea overboard.
13To punish Massachusetts for the vandalism, the British 
Parliament closed the port of Boston and restricted local authority. The new measures, dubbed the Intolerable Acts, backfi  red. Rather than isolate one colony, they rallied the 
others. All the colonies except  Georgia sent representatives 
to Philadelphia in September 1774 to discuss their “present unhappy state.” It was the fi  rst Continental Congress.
Colonists felt a growing sens e of frustration and anger 
over British encroachment on their rights. Yet by no means was there unanimity of thought on what should be done. Loyalists wanted to remain subjects of the king. Moderates favored compromise to produce a more acceptable relationship with the British government. And revolutionaries wanted complete independence. They began stockpiling weapons and mobilizing forces — waiting for the day when they would have to fi  ght for it.
Revolution 
The American Revolution — its war for independence 
from Britain — began as a small skirmish between British troops and armed colonists on April 19, 1775. 
The British had set out from Boston, Massachusetts, to 
seize weapons and ammunition that revolutionary colonists had collected in nearby villages. At Lexington, they met a group of Minutemen, who got that name because they were said to 
14The protest against British taxes known as the “Boston Tea Party, ” 1773.

16Artist’s depiction of the fi  rst shots of the American Revolution, fi  red at Lexington, 
Massachusetts, on April 19, 1775.  Local militia confronted British troops marching to seize colonial armaments in the nearby town of Concord.


18
Drawing of revolutionary fi  rebrand Patrick Henry 
(standing to the left) uttering perhaps the most famous words of the American Revolution — “Give me liberty or give me death!” — in a debate before the Virginia Assembly in 1775.
James Madison, fourth president of the 
United States, is often regarded as the “Father of the Constitution. ”  His essays in the debate over ratifi  cation of the Constitution were 
collected with those of Alexander Hamilton and John Jay as The Federalist Papers.
19be ready to fi  ght in a minute. The Minutemen intended only a 
silent protest, and their leader told them not to shoot unless fi red on fi  rst. The British ordered the Minutemen to disperse, 
and they complied. As they were withdrawing, someone fi  red 
a shot. The British troops attacked the Minutemen with guns and bayonets.
Fighting broke out at other places along the road as the 
British soldiers in their bright red uniforms made their way back to Boston. More than 250 “redcoats” were killed or wounded. The Americans lost 93 men. 
Deadly clashes continued around Boston as colonial 
representatives hurried to Philadelphia to discuss the situation. A majority voted to go to war against Britain. They agreed to 
Alexander Hamilton, secretary of the treasury 
in the administration of President George Washington. Hamilton advocated a strong federal government and the encouragement of industry. John Marshall, chief justice of the U.S. 
Supreme Court from 1801 to 1835, in a portrait by Alonzo Chappel.
20combine colonial militias into a continental army, and they 
appointed George Washington of Virginia as commander-in-chief. At the same time, however, this Second Continental Congress adopted a peace resolution urging King George III to prevent further hostilities. The king rejected it and on August 23 declared that the American colonies were in rebellion.
Calls for independence intensifi  ed in the coming months. 
Radical political theorist Thomas Paine helped crystallize the argument for separation. In a pamphlet called Common Sense , 
which sold 100,000 copies, he attacked the idea of a hereditary monarchy. Paine presented two alternatives for America: continued submission under a tyrannical king and outworn system of government, or liberty and happiness as a self-suffi  cient, independent republic.
The Second Continental Congress appointed a committee, 
headed by Thomas Jeff  erson of Virginia, to prepare a document 
outlining the colonies’ grievances against the king and explaining their decision to break away. This Declaration of Independence was adopted on July 4, 1776. The 4th of July has since been celebrated as America’s Independence Day.
The Declaration of Independence not only announced the 
birth of a new nation. It also set forth a philosophy of human freedom that would become a dynamic force throughout the 
world. It drew upon French and Br itish political ideas, especially 
those of John Locke in his Second Treatise on Government , 
21reaffi  rming the belief that political rights are basic human 
rights, and are thus universal.  
Declaring independence did not make Americans free. 
British forces routed continental troops in New York, from Long Island to New York City. They defeated the Americans at Brandywine, Pennsylvania, and occupied Philadelphia, forcing the Continental Congress to fl  ee. American forces were 
victorious at Saratoga, New York, and at Trenton and Princeton in New Jersey. Yet George Washington continually struggled to get the men and materials he desperately needed. 
Decisive help came in 1778, when France recognized 
the United States and signed a bilateral defense treaty. Support from the French government, however, was based on geopolitical, not ideological, reasons. France wanted to weaken the power of Britain, its long-time adversary.
The fi  ghting that began at Lexington, Massachusetts, 
continued for eight years across a large portion of the continent. Battles were fought from Montreal, Canada, in the north to Savannah, Georgia, in the south. A huge British army surrendered at Yorktown, Virginia, in 1781, yet the war dragged on with inconclusive results for another two years. A peace treaty was fi  nally signed in Paris on April 15, 1783.
The Revolution had a signifi  cance far beyond North 
America. It attracted the attentio n of Europe’s political theorists 
and strengthened the concept of  natural rights throughout 
22the Western world. It attracte d notables such as Thaddeus 
Kosciusko, Friedrich von Steuben, and the Marquis de Lafayette, who joined the revolution and hope d to transfer its liberal ideas 
to their own countries.
The Treaty of Paris acknowledged the independence, 
freedom, and sovereignty of the 13 former American colonies, 
now states. The task of knitting them together into a new nation lay ahead.
Formation of a National Government
The 13 American colonies became the 13 United States of America in 1783, following their war for independence from Britain. Before the war ended, they 
ratifi  ed a framework for their common eff  orts. These Articles of 
Confederation provided for a union, but an extremely loose and fragile one. George Washington called it a “rope of sand. ”
There was no common currency; individual states still 
produced their own. There was no national military force; many states still had their own armies and navies. There was little centralized control over foreign policy; states negotiated directly with other countries. An d there was no national system 
for imposing and collecting taxes.
Disputes between Maryland and Virginia over navigation 
rights on the Potomac River, which formed their common 

border, led to a conference of fi  ve states in Annapolis, Maryland, 
in 1786. Alexander Hamilton, a delegate from New York, said that such commercial issues were part of larger economic and political questions. What was needed, he said, was a rethinking of the Confederation. He and the other delegates proposed holding a convention to do just that. Support from Washington, unquestionably the most truste d man in America, won over 
those who thought the idea was too bold.
The gathering in Philadelphia in May 1787 was remarkable. 
The 55 delegates elected to the convention had experience 
The historic room in Independence Hall, Philadelphia, where delegates drafted the 
Constitution of the United States in the summer of 1787.  The Constitution is the supreme law of the land.
23
24in colonial and state government. They were knowledgeable 
in history, law, and political theory. Most were young, but the group included the elderly Benjamin Franklin, who was nearing 
the end of an extraordinary career of public service and scientifi  c 
achievement. Two notable Americans were not there: Thomas 
Jeff erson was in Paris as American ambassador to France, and 
John Adams was in London as ambassador to Great Britain.
The Continental Congress had authorized the convention to 
amend the Articles of Confederatio n. Instead, the delegates threw 
aside the Articles — judging them  inadequate for the needs of 
the new nation — and devised a new form of government based 
on the separation of legislative, executive, and judicial powers. 
The gathering had become a constitutional convention.
Reaching consensus on some of the details of a new 
constitution would prove extremely diffi   cult. Many delegates 
argued for a strong national government that limited states’ rights. Others argued equally pe rsuasively for a weak national 
government that preserved state authority. Some delegates feared that Americans were not wise enough to govern themselves and so opposed any sort of popular elections. Others thought the national government should have as broad a popular base as possible. Representatives from small states insisted on equal representation in a national legislature. Those from big states thought they deserved to have more infl  uence. 
Representatives from states where slavery was illegal hoped to 

25
The Liberty Bell, in Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, an enduring symbol of American freedom.  First rung on July 8, 1776, to celebrate the adoption of the Declaration of Independence, it cracked in 1836, during the funeral of John Marshall, Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court.
A mother and daughter viewing documents in the Exhibition Hall of the National Archives.  The U.S. Constitution, the Declaration of Independence, and the Bill of Rights are on display in this Washington, D.C., building.
Original of the U.S. Constitution, signed by the delegates in Philadelphia on September 17, 1787.
26outlaw it. Those from slave states rejected any attempts to do 
so. Some delegates wanted to limit the number of states in the Union. Others supported statehood for the newly settled lands to the West. 
Every question raised new divisions, and each was resolved 
by compromise.
The draft Constitution was not a long document. Yet it 
provided the framework for the most complex government yet devised. The national government would have full power to issue currency, levy taxes, grant patents, conduct foreign policy, maintain an army, establish post offi   ces, and wage war. And it 
would have three equal branches — a congress, a president, and a court system — with balanced powers and checks against each other’s actions. 
Economic interests infl  uenced the course of debate on the 
document, but so did state, sectional, and ideological interests. Also important was the idealism of the men who wrote it. They believed they had designed a government that would promote 
individual liberty and public virtue.
On September 17, 1787, after four months of deliberation, a 
majority of delegates signed the new Constitution. They agreed it would become the law of the land when nine of the 13 states had ratifi  ed it.
The ratifi  cation process lasted about a year. Opponents 
voiced fears that a strong central government could become 
27tyrannical and oppressive. Proponents responded that the 
system of checks and balances would prevent this from happening. The debate brought into existence two factions: the Federalists, who favored a strong central government and who supported the Constitution, and the Anti-Federalists, who 
favored a loose association of states and who opposed the Constitution. 
Even after the Constitution was ratifi  ed, many Americans 
felt it lacked an essential element. They said it did not enumerate the rights of individuals. When the fi  rst Congress 
met in New York City in September 1789, lawmakers agreed to add these provisions. It took another two years before these 
10 amendments — collectively known as the Bill of Rights — became part of the Constitution. 
The fi  rst of the 10 amendments guarantees freedom of 
speech, press, and religion; the right to protest, assemble peacefully, and demand changes. The fourth protects against unreasonable searches and arrest. The fi  fth provides for due 
process of law in all criminal cases. The sixth guarantees the right to a fair and speedy trial. And the eighth protects against cruel and unusual punishment.
Since the Bill of Rights was adopted more than 200 years 
ago, only 17 more amendments have been added to the Constitution.
28Early Years, Westward Expansion, and 
Regional Differences
George Washington was sworn in as the fi  rst president 
of the United States on April 30, 1789. He had been in charge of organizing an eff  ective military force 
during the Revolution. Now he was in charge of building a functioning government.
He worked with Congress to create departments of State, 
Treasury, Justice, and War. The heads of those departments would serve as presidential ad visors, his cabinet. A Supreme 
Court composed of one chief justice and fi  ve associate justices 
was established, together with three circuit courts and 13 district 
courts. Policies were develope d for administering the western 
territories and bringing them into the Union as new states.
Washington served two four-year terms and then left offi   ce, 
setting a precedent that eventually became law. The next two presidents, John Adams and Thomas Jeff  erson, represented two 
schools of thought on the role of government. This divergence led to the formation of the fi  rst political parties in the Western 
world. The Federalists, led by Adams and Alexander Hamilton, Washington’s secretary of the Treasury, generally represented trade and manufacturing interests. They feared anarchy and believed in a strong central government that could set national economic policies and maintain order. They had the most 
29support in the North. Republicans, led by Jeff  erson, generally 
represented agricultural interests. They opposed a strong central government and believed in states’ rights and the self-suffi  ciency of farmers. They had the most support in the South.
For about 20 years, the young nation was able to thrive 
in relative peace. Its policy was to be friendly and impartial to all other nations. However, it was not immune from political developments in Europe, particularly in Britain and France, 
which were at war. The British navy seized American ships headed 
to France, and the French navy seized American ships headed to Britain. Various diplomatic negotiations averted hostilities 
during the 1790s and early 1800s, but it seemed only a matter of time before the United States would have to defend its interests.
War with Britain came in 1812. Fighting took place mostly 
in the Northeastern states and along the east coast. One British expeditionary force reached the new capital of Washington, in the District of Columbia. It set fi  re to the executive mansion — 
causing President James Madison to fl  ee — and left the city in 
fl ames. But the U.S. army and navy won enough decisive battles 
to claim victory. After two and a half years of fi  ghting, and 
with a treasury depleted by a separate war with France, Britain signed a peace treaty with the United States. The U.S. victory ended once and for all any British hopes of reestablishing infl uence south of the Canadian border.
By the time the War of 1812 ended, many of the 
serious diffi   culties faced by the new American republic had 
disappeared. National union under the Constitution brought a balance between liberty and order. A low national debt and a continent awaiting exploration presented the prospect of peace, prosperity, and social progress. The most signifi  cant 
event in foreign policy was a pronouncement by President James Monroe expressing U.S. solidarity with the newly independent nations of Central and South America. The Monroe Doctrine warned against any further attempts by Europe to colonize Latin America. Many of the new nations, in turn, expressed their political affi   nity with the United States by 
basing their constitutions on the North American model.
The United States doubled in size with the purchase of the 
Louisiana Territory from France in 1803 and Florida from Spain in 1819. From 1816 to 1821, six new states were created. Between 
Henry Clay of Kentucky, 
although never president, was one of the most infl  uential American 
politicians of the fi  rst half 
of the 19th century.  Clay became indispensable for his role in preserving the Union with the Missouri Compromise of 1820 and the Compromise of 1850.  Both pieces of legislation resolved, for a time, disputes over slavery in the territories.
30
311812 and 1852, the population tripled. The young nation’s size and 
diversity defi  ed easy generalization. It also invited contradiction.
The United States was a country of both civilized cities 
built on commerce and industry, and primitive frontiers where the rule of law was often ignored. It was a society that loved freedom but permitted slavery. The Constitution held all these diff erent parts together. The strains, however, were growing.
Sectional Conﬂ  ict
The United States in 1850 was a huge nation stretched 
between two oceans. Wide diff  erences in geography, 
natural resources, and development were obvious from 
region to region.
New England and the Middle Atlantic states were the main 
centers of fi  nance, commerce, and manufacturing. Principal 
products included textiles and clothing, lumber, and machinery. Maritime trade fl  ourished. The Southern states were chiefl  y 
agricultural, producing tobacco, sugar, and cotton with slave labor. 
The Middle Western states were ag ricultural, too, but their grain 
and meat products came from the hands of free men and women.
In 1819, Missouri had applied for statehood. Northerners 
objected because there were 10, 000 slaves there. Congressman 
Henry Clay of Kentucky proposed a compromise: Missouri would enter the Union and continue to permit slavery, while 
32Maine would enter as a free state.
Regional positions on the issue hardened in the decades 
following the Missouri Comp romise. In the North, the 
movement to abolish slavery was vocal and grew increasingly powerful. In the South, the belief in white supremacy and in maintaining the economic status quo was equally vocal and powerful. Although thousands of  slaves escaped north through 
a network of secret routes known as the Underground Railroad, slaves still comprised a third of the population in the slave states at the time of the 1860 census. 
Most Northerners were unwilling to challenge the existence 
of slavery in the South, yet many opposed its expansion into the western territories. Southerners felt just as strongly that the territories themselves had the right to decide their status. A young politician from Illinois, Abraham Lincoln, felt that the 
issue was a national, not local one. “A house divided against itself 
cannot stand,” he said. “I believe this government cannot endure 
permanently half-slave and half-free. I do not expect the Union to be dissolved … but I do expect it will cease to be divided.”
In 1860, the Republican Party nominated Lincoln as its 
candidate for president on an anti-slavery platform. In a four-man race, he won only 39 percent of the popular vote but a clear majority of votes in the Electoral College. The Electoral College is the group of citizens who directly elect the U.S. president, following the popular vote.
33The storm that had been gathering for decades was about 
to explode with brutal force. Southern states had threatened to leave the Union if Lincoln were elected; the secessions started even before he was sworn in. It would be up to the new president to try to hold the Union together.
Civil War and Post-War Reconstruction
North and South went to war in April 1861. The Southern states had claimed the right to secede and had formed their own Confederacy. Their forces fi  red 
the fi  rst shots. The Northern states, under the leadership of 
President Lincoln, were determined to stop the rebellion and preserve the Union.
The North had more than twice as many states and twice 
as many people. It had abundant facilities for producing war supplies, as well as a superior railway network. The South had more experienced military leaders and had the advantage of fi ghting mostly on its own territory.
For four years, ground battles involving tens of thousands 
of soldiers and horses were fought in Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, and Georgia. Naval battles were fought off   the Atlantic coast and on the Mississippi River. In 
that area, Union forces won an almost uninterrupted series of 
victories. In Virginia, by contrast, they met defeat after defeat in 
Slave family picking cotton 
near Savannah, Georgia, in the early 1860s.President Abraham 
Lincoln (center), at a Union Army encampment in October 1862, following the battle of Antietam.
Confederate dead along 
a stone wall during the Chancellorsville campaign, May 1863.  Victorious at Chancellorsville, Southern forces advanced north into Pennsylvania, but were defeated at the three-day battle of Gettysburg, the turning point of the Civil War and the largest battle ever fought in North America.  More Americans died in the Civil War (1861-65) than in any other confl  ict in 
U.S. history. 
34
35their attempts to capture Richmond, the Confederate capital. 
The single bloodiest day of the war was on September 17, 
1862, when the two armies met at Antietam Creek near Sharpsburg, Maryland. Confederate troops led by General Robert E. Lee failed to 
force back the Union troops led by General George McClellan, and 
Lee escaped with his army intact. McClellan was fi  red. Although 
the battle was inconclusive in military terms, its consequences were enormous. Britain and France had been planning to recognize the Confederacy. They delayed their decisions, and the South never received the aid it desperately needed.
Several months later, President Lincoln issued a preliminary 
Emancipation Proclamation. It freed all slaves living in Confederate states and authorized the recruitment of African Americans into the Union army. Now the North was no longer 
fi ghting just to preserve the Union. It was fi  ghting to end slavery.
Union forces gained momentum in 1863 with victories 
at Vicksburg in Mississippi an d Gettysburg in Pennsylvania, 
and then with the scorched-earth policy of General William T. Sherman as he marched across Georgia and into South Carolina in 1864. By April 1865, huge Union armies under the command 
of General Ulysses S. Grant had surrounded Robert E. Lee in Virginia. Lee surrendered, and the American Civil War was over.
The terms of surrender were ge nerous. “The rebels are our 
countrymen again,” Grant reminded his troops. In Washington, President Lincoln was ready to begin the process of 

36reconciliation. He never got the chance. Less than a week after 
the South surrendered, he was assassinated by a Southerner 
embittered by the defeat. The task would fall to Lincoln’s vice president, Andrew Johnson, a Southerner who favored quick and easy “Reconstruction.”
Johnson issued pardons that restored the political rights 
of many Southerners. By the end of 1865, almost all former Confederate states had held conventions to repeal the acts of 
secession and to abolish slavery, but all except Tennessee refused 
to ratify a constitutional amendment giving full citizenship to African Americans. As a result, Republicans in Congress decided to implement their own version of Reconstruction. They enacted punitive measures against former rebels and prevented former Confederate leaders from holding offi   ce. They divided 
the South into fi  ve military districts administered by Union 
generals. They denied voting rights to anyone who refused to take a loyalty oath to the Union. And they strongly supported the rights of African Americans. President Johnson tried to block many of these policies and was impeached. The vote fell short, and he remained in offi   ce, but Congress would continue 
to wield enormous power for the next 30 years.
The divisions and hatreds that had led to the Civil War did 
not disappear after the fi  ghting stopped. As Southern whites 
regained political power, Southern blacks suff  ered. They had 
gained their freedom but were prevented from enjoying it by 
37local laws denying them access to many public facilities. They 
had gained the right to vote but were intimidated at the polls. 
The South had become segregat ed and would remain so for 
100 years. The postwar Reconstruction process had begun with high ideals but collapsed into a sinkhole of corruption and racism. Its failure deferred the struggle for equality for African Americans until the 20th century, when it would become a national, not just a Southern, issue.
Growth and Transformation
The United States came of age in the decades following the Civil War. The frontier gradually vanished; a rural republic became an urban nation. Great factories, steel 
mills, and transcontinental railroads were built. Cities grew quickly. And millions of people arrived from other countries to begin new lives in a land of opportunity.
Inventors harnessed the power of science. Alexander 
Graham Bell developed the telephone. Thomas Edison produced the light bulb and, with George Eastman, the moving picture. Before 1860, the government issued 36,000 patents. In the next 30 years, it issued 440,000.
It was an era of corporate consolidation, especially in 
the steel, rail, oil, and telecommunications industries. Monopolies denied competition in the marketplace, which led 
to calls for government regulation. A law was passed in 1890 
to prevent monopolies from restraining trade, but it was not vigorously enforced at fi  rst.
Even with the great gains in industry, farming remained 
America’s basic occupation. Yet it, too, witnessed enormous changes. Farmland doubled and scientists developed improved seeds. Machines — including mechanical planters, reapers, and threshers — took over much of the work that had previously 
been done by hand. American farmers produced enough grain, cotton, beef, pork, and wool to supply the growing domestic market and still have large surpluses to export.
The western region of the United States continued to 
attract settlers. Miners staked claims in the ore-rich mountains, 
Sitting Bull, Sioux chief who led the last great 
battle of the Plains Indians against the U.S. Army, defeating General George Custer at the Battle of Little Bighorn in 1876.  
Thomas Edison examines fi  lm used in the 
motion picture projector that he invented with George Eastman.
38
39cattle ranchers on the vast grasslands, sheep farmers in the 
river valleys, and farmers on the great plains. Cowboys on horses took care of the animals and guided them to distant railroads for shipment east. This  is the image of America that 
many people still have, even though the era of the “Wild West” cowboy lasted only about 30 years.
From the time that Europeans landed on the east coast of 
America, their migration westwa rd meant confrontation with 
native peoples. For many years, government policy had been to move Native Americans beyond the reach of the white frontier to lands reserved for their use.  Time and again, however, the 
government ignored its agreements and opened these areas to white settlement. In the late 1800s, Sioux tribes in the northern plains and Apaches in the southwest fought back hard to 
Immigrants arriving at Ellis Island in New York City, principal gateway to the 
United States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.  From 1890 to 1921, almost 19 million people entered the United States as immigrants.
Mulberry Street in New York City, also 
known as “Little Italy, ” in the early years 
of the 20th century.  Newly arrived 
immigrant families often settled 
in densely populated urban 
enclaves. 
40

42preserve their way of life. They were skilled fi  ghters but were 
eventually overwhelmed by government forces. Offi   cial policy 
after these confl  icts was well-intentioned but sometimes proved 
disastrous. In 1934, Congress passed a measure that attempted 
to protect tribal customs and communal life on the reservations.
The last decades of the 19th century saw a race by European 
powers to colonize Africa and compete for trade in Asia. Many 
Americans believed the United States had a right and duty to expand its infl  uence in other parts of the world. Many others, 
however, rejected any actions that hinted at imperialism. 
A brief war with Spain in 1898 left the United States with 
control over several Spanish overseas possessions: Cuba, Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines. Offi   cially, the United States 
encouraged them to move toward self-government, but, in fact, it maintained administrative control. Idealism in foreign policy existed alongside the practical desire to protect the economic 
interests of a once-isolated nation that had become a world power.
Discontent and Reform
By 1900, America’s political foundations had endured growing pains, civil war, prosperity, and economic depression. The ideal of religious freedom had been 
sustained. Free public education had largely been realized, and a free press had been maintained. At the same time, however, 
43political power seemed concentrated in the hands of corrupt 
offi  cials and their friends in business. In response, a reform 
movement called “Progressivism” arose. Its goals included greater democracy and social justice, honest government, and more eff  ective regulation of business. 
Writers and social critics protested practices that were 
unfair, unhealthy, and dangerous. Upton Sinclair, Ida M. Tarbell, Theodore Dreiser, Lincoln Steff  ens, and others produced a 
“literature of exposure” that put pressure on lawmakers to 
correct these abuses through legi slation. The reformers believed 
that expanding the scope of government would ensure the 
progress of U.S. society and the welfare of its citizens.
President Theodore Roosevelt embodied the spirit 
of Progressivism and believed that reforms needed to be addressed nationally. He worked with Congress to regulate monopolies and take legal action against companies that violated the law. He also was tireless in his eff  orts to conserve 
the United States’ natural resources, manage public lands, and protect areas for recreational use.
Reforms continued during the presidencies of William 
Howard Taft and Woodrow Wilson. The Federal Reserve banking system was established to set interest rates and control the money supply. The Federal Trade Commission was established to deal with unfair methods of competition by businesses. New laws were enacted to help improve working conditions 
44for sailors and railroad laborers. A “county extension” system 
was developed to help farmers get information and credit. And 
taxes on imported goods were lowered or eliminated to help reduce the cost of living for all Americans.
The Progressive era was also the era when great numbers 
of people from all over the world came to the United States. Almost 19 million people arrived between 1890 and 1921. Earlier immigrants had been chiefl  y northern and western Europeans 
and some Chinese. The new arriv als came from Italy, Russia, 
Poland, Greece, the Balkans, Canada, Mexico, and Japan.
The United States has always been a “melting pot” of 
nationalities, and for 300 years few restrictions were placed 
Children working at the Indiana Glass Works in 1908. Enacting child labor laws was one of the 
principal goals of the Progressive movement in this era.
45on immigration. Starting in th e 1920s, however, quotas were 
established in response to Americans’ fears that their jobs and culture were being threatened by the newcomers. While large 
surges of immigration have historically created social strains, most 
Americans — whose own ancestors arrived as immigrants — believe that the Statue of Liberty in New York harbor represents 
the spirit of a welcoming land to those “yearning to breathe free.” 
This belief has preserved the United States as a nation of nations.
World War I, 1920s Prosperity, 
the Great Depression
War in Europe in 1914 — with Germany and Austria-
Hungary fi  ghting Britain, France, Italy, and Russia 
— aff  ected U.S. interests almost from the start. The 
British and the German navies both interfered with American shipping, but German submarine attacks were deadly. Almost 130 Americans died when a submarine sank the British ocean liner Lusitania in 1915. President Woodrow Wilson demanded 
an end to the attacks, and they stopped for a while, but by 1917 they had resumed. The United States declared war. 
The eff  orts of more than 1,750,000 U.S. troops played a 
decisive role in the defeat of the German and Austro-Hungarian alliance. An armistice, technically a truce but actually a surrender, was concluded on November 11, 1918.
President Wilson negotiated an end to the confl  ict based on 
his 14-point plan for achieving la sting peace. It included an end 
to secret international agreements, free trade between nations, a reduction in national armame nts, self-rule for subjugated 
European nationalities, and fo rmation of an association — a 
League of Nations — to help guarantee political independence and territorial integrity for large and small countries alike.
The fi  nal peace treaty, however, contained virtually none 
of these points, as the victors insisted on harsh punishment. Wilson’s idea of a League of Nations remained in the Treaty of Versailles, but even he was unable to gain enough support for the concept, and the United States rejected it. America reverted to its instinctive isolationism.
American infantry forces in 1918, fi  ring a 37 
mm. gun, advance against German positions in World War I.
Flappers posing for the camera at a 1920s-era party.
46
47The immediate postwar period was one of labor unrest and 
racial tensions. Farmers were struggling because of the abrupt 
end of wartime demand. Bolshevik violence fueled a “Red Scare” that led to decades of militant hostility toward the revolutionary Communist movement. Despite these problems, for a few years 
in the 1920s the United States enjoyed a period of real and broadly distributed prosperity. Families purchased their fi  rst 
automobile, radio, and refriger ator, and they began going to 
the movies regularly. And suff  ragists, after decades of political 
activism, succeeded in getting approval of a constitutional amendment in 1920 that gave women the right to vote.
The good times did not last. The value of many stocks, which 
had become artifi  cially infl  ated, fell dramatically in October 1929. 
Over the next three years, the business recession in America 
became part of a worldwide economic depression. Businesses and factories shut down, banks failed, farm income dropped. By November 1932, 20 percent of Americans were unemployed.
The presidential campaign that year was chiefl  y a debate 
over the causes of the Great Depression and ways to reverse it. Incumbent Herbert Hoover had started the process of rebuilding the economy, but his eff  orts had little impact, 
and he lost the election to Franklin Roosevelt. Roosevelt was infectiously optimistic and was re ady to use federal authority to 
achieve bold remedies. Under his leadership, the United States would enter another era of ec onomic and political change.

48The New Deal and World War II
In the early 1930s, President Franklin Roosevelt proposed 
a “New Deal” — a plan designed to lift Americans out of the Great Depression as quickly as possible. He noted that 
democracy had disappeared in other countries at that time — not because the people opposed democracy but because they had grown tired of unemployment and insecurity. 
Under his leadership, a federal corporation was established 
to insure deposits in savings banks. Regulations were imposed on the sale of stocks. Laws were passed to guarantee the right of workers to be represented by unions. Farmers received subsidies for certain crops and assistance in preventing soil erosion. The Civilian Conservation Corps employed young men 
Left, Depression-era soup line, 1930s.  Right, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signs perhaps 
the most far-reaching legislation of the New Deal:  the Social Security Act of 1935.  Today, Social Security, one of the largest government programs in the United States, provides retirement and disability income to millions of Americans. 

49to plant trees, clean up waterways, and improve facilities in 
national parks. The Public Works Administration hired skilled laborers for large-scale projec ts, such as building dams and 
bridges. The Tennessee Valley Authority provided fl  ood control 
and electric power for that impo verished area. And the Federal 
Emergency Relief Administration distributed aid, often in the form of direct payments.
A second round of programs employed workers to build 
roads, airports, and schools; hired artists, actors, musicians, and writers; and gave part-time employment to young people. It also established the Social Security system to help the poor, disabled, and elderly.
Americans were generally unea sy with the idea of big 
government, yet they wanted the government to take greater responsibility for the welfare of ordinary people. And while the New Deal provided tangible help for millions of Americans, it never succeeded in restoring prosperity. Better times would come, but not until after another world war had swept the United States into its path.
The United States tried to remain neutral while totalitarian 
regimes in Germany, Italy, and Japan expanded their control over neighboring countries. Debate intensifi  ed after Germany 
invaded France and began bombing Britain. Despite strong isolationist sentiment, Congress voted to conscript soldiers and strengthen the military.

50
World War II in the Pacifi  c was characterized by large-scale naval and air battles.  Here, a 
Japanese plane plunges down in fl  ames during an attack on a U.S. carrier fl  eet in the Mariana 
Islands, June 1944.

51
General Dwight 
Eisenhower, Supreme Commander in Europe, talks with paratroopers shortly before the Normandy invasion, June 6, 1944.  
Assembly line of P-38 Lightning  
fi ghter planes 
during World War II.  With its massive output of war materiel, the United States became, in the words of President Roosevelt, “the arsenal of democracy. ”
52Most people were focused on what was happening 
in Europe, when Japan threatened to seize sources of raw materials used by Western industries. In response, the United States imposed an embargo on the one commodity Japan needed above all others — oil — and demanded that it withdraw from territories it had conquered. Japan refused, and on December 7, 1941, it carried out a devastating attack on the U.S. Pacifi  c Fleet at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. The United States 
declared war on Japan. Germany and Italy, by then allies of Japan, declared war on the United States.
American industry and agricu lture were harnessed for the 
war eff  ort. Production of military equipment was staggering: 
300,000 aircraft, 5,000 cargo sh ips, 60,000 landing craft, and 
86,000 tanks in less than four ye ars. Much of the work was done 
by women, who went to work in  factories while men went to 
fi ght.
The United States, Britain, and the Soviet Union, allied to 
counter the Nazi threat, decided that their primary military eff ort was to be concentrated in Europe. They were determined 
to break the German-Italian grip on the Mediterranean and prevent the fall of Moscow. Then they would liberate Rome and Paris, and fi  nally Berlin. 
From Germany’s occupation of Poland in 1939 to its surrender 
in 1945, the war in Europe claimed the lives of millions of people 
— soldiers and civilians alike. Millions more were exterminated 
53in the Holocaust, Nazi Germany’s systematic policy of genocide 
against the Jews and other groups.
The war in Asia was largely a series of naval battles and 
amphibious assaults to break the Japanese grip on islands in the Pacifi  c Ocean. Fighting there continued after the fi  ghting 
in Europe had stopped. The fi  nal battles were among the war’s 
bloodiest. Most Americans, including President Harry Truman, 
believed that an invasion of Jap an would be even worse. Truman 
was willing to use the newly developed atomic bomb to bring 
the war to an end. When Japan refused to surrender, he ordered bombs dropped on the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
The plan worked — Japan surrendered — and World War II 
was fi  nally over in August 1945. Only later would people realize 
the full implications of the awesome, destructive power of nuclear weapons.
The Cold War, Korean Conﬂ  ict, and 
Vietnam
The United States played a major role in global aff  airs 
in the years immediately after World War II, especially through its infl  uence in the newly formed United 
Nations and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). The most important political and diplomatic issue of the early postwar period was the Cold War. It grew out of longstanding 
disagreements between the United States and the Soviet Union 
over which type of government and economic system produced the most liberty, equality, and prosperity.
Faced with a postwar world of civil wars and disintegrating 
empires, the United States hoped to provide the stability to make 
peaceful reconstruction possible. It advocated democracy and open trade, and committed $17,000 million under the “Marshall 
President Harry S 
Truman holds a newspaper that wrongly announced his defeat by Republican candidate Thomas Dewey in the 1948 election.
U.S. infantry fi  re 
against North 
Korean forces 
invading South 
Korea in 1951, 
in a confl  ict that 
lasted three 
painful years. 
54
55Plan” to rebuild western Europe. The Soviet Union wanted to 
secure its borders at all costs. It used military force to help bring Communist regimes to power in Central and Eastern Europe.
The United States vowed to contain Soviet expansionism. 
It demanded and obtained a full Soviet withdrawal from Iran. It supported Turkey against Soviet attempts to control shipping lanes. It provided economic and military aid to Greece to fi  ght 
a strong Communist insurgency. And it led the eff  ort to airlift 
millions of tons of supplies to Berlin when the Soviet Union blockaded that divided city.
With most American aid moving across the Atlantic, 
little could be done to prevent the Communist forces of Mao Zedong from taking control of China in 1949. When North Korea — supported by China and the Soviet Union — invaded South Korea the next year, the United States secured U.N. support for military intervention. The North Koreans were eventually pushed back, and a truce was signed, but tensions would 
remain high and U.S. troops would stay for decades.
In the mid-1960s, the United States sent troops to defend 
South Vietnam against a Communist insurgency based in North Vietnam. American involvement escalated greatly but was not enough to prevent the South from collapsing in 1975. The war cost hundreds of thousands of lives. It also caused bitter divisions at home, making Americans wary of further foreign entanglements.
56Cultural Change: 1950-1980
Most Americans felt confi  dent with their role in the 
world in the 1950s. They accepted the need for a strong stance against global Communism and 
supported eff  orts to share the benefi  ts of democracy as widely 
as possible. At home, they were experiencing phenomenal economic gains and a shift to a service economy. A boom in births fueled the growth of suburban areas around cities. Yet not all Americans participated in this good life, and gradually, challenges to the status quo began to mount.
African Americans launched a movement to guarantee fair 
treatment everywhere. They won a major victory in 1954 when the Supreme Court ruled that separate educational facilities for black children were not equal to  those for white children. The 
decision started the process of desegregating the nation’s public schools. In the 1960s — led by the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. and with the support of President Lyndon Johnson — African Americans won passage of civil rights and voting 
rights legislation. Some black leaders, such as Malcolm X, argued against interracial cooperation, and some militant calls for reform led to violence. However, many African Americans made quiet, steady progress into the ranks of the middle class, leading to a profound demographic change in American society. 
During the 1960s-70s, many American women expressed 
57frustration that they did not have  the same opportunities as men. 
Led by writer Betty Friedan and journalist Gloria Steinem, they 
organized a movement that helped change laws and traditions to 
give women the chance to compet e equally with men in business 
and education. However, their eff  orts to adopt a constitutional 
amendment guaranteeing equal rights for women fell short 
when only 35 of the necessary 38 states ratifi  ed it. 
A new generation of Native-American leaders organized 
to defend the rights the government had promised in various treaties with tribal groups. They used the court system to regain control of tribal lands and water rights. They used the legislative process to get the assistance they needed to house and educate their people. The fi  rst Native American to be elected to the 
Senate was Ben Nighthorse Campbell in 1992.
Hispanic Americans, especially  those whose families came 
from Mexico, Central America, Puerto Rico, and Cuba, became more politically active, too. They were elected to local, state, and national offi   ces, and they organized to fi  ght discrimination. 
César Chávez, for example, led a nationwide consumer boycott of California grapes that forced growers to negotiate with his United Farm Workers union for higher wages and improved working conditions.
Many students became politically active to protest the war 
in Vietnam, which they believed was immoral. They organized large protests that eventually put pressure on President 
58
Jackie Robinson, sliding 
home in a 1948 baseball game.  Robinson broke the color barrier against black professional baseball players when he joined the Brooklyn Dodgers and became one of the stars of the game.
America’s fi  rst star of rock and roll, Elvis 
Presley, performing on television’s “Ed Sullivan Show, ” September 9, 1956.
Martin Luther King Jr. escorts children to a previously all-white public school in Grenada, Mississippi, in 1966.

59Johnson to begin peace negotiations. Young people also began 
to reject their parents’ cultural values. The most visible signs of the so-called counterculture were long hair, rock-and-roll music, and the use of illegal drugs. 
Americans concerned about the environment organized 
eff orts to reduce air and water pollution. The year 1970 saw 
the fi  rst “Earth Day” celebration and the creation of the 
Environmental Protection Agency. Environmental legislation refl ected the need to reduce pollutants without imposing 
burdensome costs on industries. 
The great social changes of the 1950s-1980s grew out 
of an open, fl  uid, and diverse society. Demands for change 
were sometimes peaceful, so metimes deadly. Compromises 
President Lyndon B. Johnson 
engineered the most ambitious domestic legislative agenda through Congress since Roosevelt’s New Deal.The crest of the counterculture wave in the United States: 
the three-day 1969 outdoor rock concert and gathering known as Woodstock. 
60were necessary. Surely, if sometimes slowly, the United States 
changed to better refl  ect its multicultural foundation.  
End of the 20th Century
The United States has always experienced periods of 
political polarization, as Americans debated ways to deal with international events, demographic change, 
and the eff  ects of technological innovation. The last decades of 
the 20th century were no exception.
The liberal activism of the 1960s-70s was eclipsed by a new 
conservatism in the 1980s. Conservatives advocated limited government, a strong national defense, a fi  rm stance against 
Communism, tax cuts to spur economic growth, tough anti-crime measures, more religious ex pression in public life, and a 
stricter code for social behavior. Former actor and Republican Governor of California Ronald Reagan, who represented stability to many Americans, won two terms as president. His supporters credit his policies with hastening the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Americans moved to a more centrist position in 1992 and 
elected as president Arkansas Governor Bill Clinton, who had organized his campaign around the themes of youth and change. Some of Clinton’s proposals were quite liberal, such as his plan for a government-managed health care system, 
61which Congress never voted on. Another proposal — ending 
government payments to welfare recipients and helping them get jobs — was co-opted from conservatives and eventually proved quite successful. 
Normal diff  erences in politics turned especially bitter after 
the presidential election of 2000. The popular vote and the Electoral College vote were nearly evenly divided between Democrat Al Gore and Republican George W. Bush. Thousands of ballots cast in the state of Florida were contested. After a series of court challenges over laws and procedures governing recounts, the U.S. Supreme Court handed down a narrow decision that eff  ectively gave the election to Bush.
Bush expected to focus on domestic issues such as 
education, the economy, and Social Security. But his presidency changed irrevocably on September 11, 2001. On that day, foreign terrorists hijacked four passenger airplanes and 
crashed them into the World Trade Center towers in New York City, the Defense Department’s Pentagon headquarters near Washington, D.C., and a rural area of Pennsylvania. Bush declared war on global terrorism. Americans were generally united in the early phases, but many grew increasingly uncomfortable as the operation expanded. 
The long-term eff  ects of events and trends occurring at the 
beginning of the 21st century have yet to be fully understood. 
62
Left, fi  refi ghters beneath the 
destroyed vertical struts of the World Trade Center’s twin towers after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in New York and Washington, D.C.  Above, projected image of how the New York City skyline might look with the addition of Freedom Tower, which will be built at the World Trade Center site. 
63
AFTERWORD
From its origins as a group of obscure colonies hugging 
the coast of the Atlantic Ocean, the United States has undergone a remarkable transformation. One political 
analyst has called it “the fi  rst universal nation. ” Its population 
of 300 million people represents almost every nationality and ethnic group on Earth. It is a nation where the pace and extent of change — economic, technological, cultural, demographic, and social — is unceasing. Events in the United States are often the fi  rst sign of the modernization and change that 
inevitably bring other nations and societies into an increasingly interdependent, interconnected world.
Yet the United States also maintains a sense of continuity. 
It possesses core values that can be traced to its founding as a nation in the late 1700s. These include a faith in individual freedom and democratic government, and a commitment to economic opportunity and progress for all. They are the legacy of a rich and turbulent history. The continuing task of the United States is to ensure that its values of freedom, democracy, and opportunity are protected and will fl  ourish through the 
21st century.
64
Photo Credits:
Credits from left to right are separated by semicolons, from top to bottom by dashes.Cover illustration by Min-Chih Yao with photos from: © Robert Llewellyn (Independence Hall). © AP Images (Mt. Rushmore; Jackie Robinson; Henry Ford; Golden Gate Bridge; immigrants; Iwo Jima Memorial). Interior Department/National Park Service (Liberty Bell). National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) (space shuttle). Mario Tama/AFP/Getty Images (fi  reworks). Library of Congress (Stanton and Anthony; Sitting Bull).  © PhotoSpin, Inc. (Arlington Cemetery; Statue of Liberty). Dick Halstead/Time Life Pictures/Getty Images (Reagan-Gorbachev). Painting by Don Troiani, www.historicalprints.com (American Revolution). © Steve Krongard (children with computer). Courtesy MTV (MTV screen shot). Page 1:  Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, Richmond. Gift of Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garbisch. 2: (c) © Russ Finley/Finley-Holiday Films. 3: Mark C. Burnett/Photo Researchers, Inc. 5:  © Miles Ertman/Masterfi  le – © Chuck Place. 8: Courtesy The Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts – © AP Images. 9:  Library of Congress (LOC); © AP Images (2). 14-15:  LOC. 16-17: Painting by Don Troiani, www.historicalprints.com. 18: LOC -- The American History Slide Collection,© Instructional Resources Corporation (IRC). 19: : National Portrait Gallery, Smithsonian Institution; © AP Images. 23: © Robert Llewellyn. 25: Interior Department/National Park Service – Michael Ventura/FOLIO, Inc.; The National Archives. 30: LOC. 34: LOC; © Bettmann/CORBIS – LOC. 38: LOC; Edison Birthday Committee. 39: Culver. 40-41: LOC. 44: LOC. 46: The National Archives; Hulton Archive/Getty Images. 48: The American History Slide Collection, © (IRC); © AP Images. 50: The National Archives. 51:  US Army – Lockheed. 54: © Bettmann/CORBIS – US Army. 58: © AP Images (3). 59: © AP Images; Culver. 62-63:  © AP Images; Courtesy of Silverstein Properties. Inside back cover: Mario Tama/AFP/Getty Images.
Executive Editor: George Clack
Managing Editor: Mildred Solá NeelyWriter: Christine JohnsonArt Director/Design: Min-Chih YaoPhoto Research: Maggie Johnson Sliker
BUREAU OF INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION PROGRAMS
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE
http://usinfo.state.gov/
